---
layout: post
title: Guide to Software Conferences For the New Attendee
tags: conference, architecture
description: I recently attended the O'Reilly Software Architecture Conference from April 10-13, 2016 in New York, my first-ever conference.  Here are more details on my experience particularly if conferences are new to you.
---
I was fortunate recently to be able to attend O'Reilly's Software Architecture Conference in New York City, held April 10-13, 2016 at the Hilton Midtown Hotel in Manhattan.  This was the first conference I've ever been to and while it went fine, I realized there's a lot of small things that go into a conference that simply never occurred to me.  If you're about to go to a conference for the first (specifically a technical conference), I hope this will help you too. 

<h3>Why A Conference</h3>
This happens before you attend the conference, before you even plunk down the money to register.  I was asked this question by a fellow attendee: why this conference?  Why a conference at all?  The reason I chose O'Reilly was two-fold.  One: my boss initially asked me about going to Microsoft's Build 2016 conference in San Francisco.  I wasn't interested in that because Build has kind of become a circus and I didn't want to travel to San Francisco.  I found the O'Reilly conference because I really wanted to attend a non-Microsoft conference.  I love C# and .NET and Microsoft has really turned over a new leaf in many regards, but I wanted a more "pure" interpretation of a concept and O'Reilly seemed perfect as it's agnostic to language (although yes, to some extent they assume folks are on Java or at least the JVM).  And two: I knew I could take a train from my home (Charlottesville, VA) to New York and take an easy subway ride to the hotel. I'm okay with flying, but it's the circus around flying that I don't like and when you factor in everything, not a huge time savings.  

<h3>Good Point, Tell Me More About Travel</h3>
For people that travel a lot, flying and taking public transportation isn't a big deal.  I do neither that often so the ease of getting from the transit hub to the hotel was important to me.  New York has such a dominant public transit compared to basically every other US city that getting around it is pretty easy once you figure out a few basic things.  So definitely if conferences are new to you and you're anxious, try to find one in New York.  We took Amtrak up from Charlottesville, took about 6 hours, very easy ride.  If you're taking Amtrak, definitely spring for the business class.  It's like $50 per trip, but you get extra leg room plus a complimentary beverage from the travel car.  Amtrak boasts about providing Wifi, but for most of the trip it was absolute garbage so I wouldn't count on it; plan to work offline.  

On Amtrak when you get to Penn Station, it's a bit overwhelming.  We ended up not going the correct, easy route to the subway and ended up leaving the stattion, walking, a few blocks, then reentering the subway.  It was raining and that was a lot of steps while carrying a giant duffel bag so make sure you read the signage or ask someone for help.  Once we got into the subway, we (wife and I) bought 7-day unlimited metro passes for $31 each.  That's definitely the way to go.  A lot of the subway stations have an Information booth so definitely ask that person for guidance on which train to get on for your destination.  We did that the first time, which was a help because we wanted to take the E train, but it wasn't running that day (Saturday) so the Information person helped us out.  The more useful thing to know: Google Maps will give you Subway routes.  And for most of the trip, that's how we did it.  We would type where we wanted to go into Google on our phones (which includes restaurants or other landmarks), then choose the Subway option and it will show you which trains to take, how many stops, connections, how long it will take, etc.  That was our goto and it worked great.  Other guides say this and it's true: you get the hang of swiping your metro card and going through the turnstile.  Watch other people do it if you need to, but if you're nervous, swipe the card, make sure it reads "Go", then push through the turnstile.  Don't be in too big of a hurry but after a few times, you'll get the rhythm.

Here's what my wife and I had packed: backpack (I wore), two carryable bags (my wife), one large duffel bag with wheels (I carried).  We debated small rolling suitcases or one large rolling suitcase, but chose the duffel bag we had.  For us, that worked great for a couple reasons.  One, in the subway you have to lift it over the turnstile.  That's easier with a duffel bag (designed to be carried) vs. a suitcase.  With 2 people, it's pretty easy to send someone through the turnstile, hand them the bags, then second person swipes through.  That would be possible with larger suitcases too but lifting them can be more difficult.  That said, I carried the duffel bag through myself and it was okay. If you're concerned, cabs are always an option (or Uber), but we did'nt avail ourselves of either. 

<h3>Okay, Talk About The Conference A Bit</h3>
I received an email from O'Reilly with information regarding check-in to the conference.  The most important factor is the check-in hours, which O'Reilly helpfully put into the email.  Also O'Reilly had a conference mobile app I downloaded and it was very useful (more on that later). At least at this conference, in-person check-in was necessary only to get your badge.  Here, the badges had RFID so it could tell what sessions you attended.  I'm sure that's standard practice now.  I was surprised O'Reilly didn't give out more swag on check-in. 

O'Reilly split up the conference into a few parts.  The conference was 2 days, Tuesday and Wednesday.  Before that, if you paid more, you could do a 2-day hands on training Sunday and Monday or 1 day tutorials (1 AM, 1 PM) on Monday.  I opted for the 1 day tutorial. 

Here's my number one finding about O'Reilly: 45 minutes is the sweet spot for sessions.  I'll break down the sessions in a bit, but I sat though talks that were 20 minutes (morning keynotes at the conference), 45 minutes (afternoon sessions during the conference), 90 minutes (the morning session at the conference), and 3 hours (the Monday tutorials).  With one exception, the 20 minute keynotes were pretty bland.  That's not nearly enough time to get into much interesting or tactile.  The 3 hour sessions were simply too long.  Neither speaker I attended seemed to have 3 hours of quality content so it felt like a lot of filler or fluff around otherwise useful information.  That also applies to the 90 minute conference sessions, both had 45 minutes of material padded unnecessarily.  I'm generalizing wildly here as of course I didn't attend every session of the entire event and maybe some were better than all the ones I attended, just be aware that while some of the conference speakers do it a lot, others aren't as experienced and you'll probably be able to tell. 

Here's some niceties that were available that I didn't realize or use, but would definitely come in handy situationally.  
- Some hotels provide a baggage check that allows you to fairly securely store your luggage with the hotel when you don't have a room.  For attendees, this was useful if they were leaving at the end of a day but had to check out at noon.  The baggage check allowed them some place to leave their stuff while they attended without carting it around. 
- O'Reilly provided computers to print boarding passes.  This was helpful for people flying out who didn't print it earlier or forgot or whatever.  
- The food supplied for lunches and snacks was pretty good (relative to other hotel food I've had), but beyond being kind of picky, I don't have any weird allergies.  All 3 days, lunches were fancy sandwiches (turkey, roast beef, chicken, it varied each day). They also had a soup.  There were some vegetarian options, but if you're gluten free (like my mother-in-law, my dad's girlfriend, and a developer that reports to me), I have no idea how (or if) that was accommodated. Doesn't mean don't ask, but once again, people with allergies might get it in the shorts a bit.  The snacks were fruit and some sweets plus coffee.  I don't personally drink coffee so unfortunate they didn't have iced tea or something (albeit this was NY, iced tea might be a foreign concept :-)

<h3>Break Down The Sessions!</h3>

The sessions covered a broad spectrum from incredibly engrossing to not that interesting.  When I selected talks, I did so using this process: a) Did I recognize the speaker? If so, I attended. b) Did I think I would make use of the subject matter at work? If so, I'd probably attend. c) Was it better than all the other options though none of the options were great for me in that time slot? This was the default if (a) and (b) weren't met. 

Hands down the most enjoyable talk I heard was given by Mark Bates.  He discussed how he and a friend tried to launch a platform to make it easier for conference speakers to submit talks.  They had 3 months to build a version that his friend had already sold to a Ruby conference.  He walked through how he laid out the latest and greatest in microservice architectures, selected a language he'd never used before (Go), and then picked a number of other slick technologies.  Long story short: after 3 months he had basically nothing.  He then slowly walked that back to a standard Ruby monolith backed by Postgres and with Angular.  He pointed out that this was a pretty heretical finding at this conference with so many microservice talks going on, but his main point was: if your company doesn't have scale problems like Netflix or Amazon, why would their solution be necessary? In his case, his company/product was so new, that the scale just wasn't there.  Better to start with a monolith, get something online, and then iterate over it later.  The things I enjoyed about this talk: Mark told the story as a narrative and he was incredibly funny and personable about it; the lesson really resonated with me that other people's solutions are useful if you don't have their problems.  

I listened to two talks by Michael Nygard, one on manueverable architecture and the other on architecture without an end state.  I had read Michael's book (Release It!, which I highly recommend) and so I wanted to hear him speak for that reason.  Michael is a great presenter, it's clear he does it a lot.  Both were packed with information and I took pages of notes.  I won't attempt to recreate all of them, but if you ever have a chance to hear Michael, take advantage of it. 

The keynotes in the morning were generally kind of blah as 20 minutes isn't enough time to get into much that's actionable, but to me the best one was given by Janelle Klein on "Make the pain visible". She discussed software projects that had failed on her in the past and her recent efforts to find a way for software developers to expose the difficulty and friction of writing code and the myriad activities that get in the way.  This was truly a powerful perspective and a thing I hear from my developers quite a bit.  I liked this talk so much I contacted Janelle about her e-book and am hoping to leverage some of her ideas in the near future.  

<h3>Wrap Up</h3>

Overall, I enjoyed the O'Reilly conference experience.  I learned quite a bit.  I wish I had gone to some different sessions than those I initially selected so that's a lesson for next time to think more deeply about the topic or try to find better intel on what will be covered. Would I go to O'Reilly again?  That's a tough question.  I would go, yes, though there are other conferences I'd like to try first.  One of those is QCon, which is loaded with speakers across a lot of technologies and I think that has some compelling offerings.  I've heard great things about some others and I wish I could go to NDC, but my company isn't much on sponsoring conference attendance at overseas conferences so unless NDC comes to the US, unlikely I'll make it to that one anytime soon. 


